On December 6, 2017, then-U.S. President Donald Trump announced that the U.S. would recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, and ordered the planning of the relocation of Israel's U.S. Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu welcomed the decision and praised the announcement. On December 8, U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson clarified that Trump's statement "did not indicate any final status for Jerusalem" and "was very clear that the final status, including the borders, would be left to the two parties to negotiate and decide".Trump's decision was rejected by a majority of world leaders; the UN Security Council held an emergency meeting on December 7, where 14 out of 15 members condemned it, but the motion was vetoed by the U.S. Britain, France, Japan, Italy, and Sweden were among the countries who criticized Trump's decision at the meeting. Other countries supported the move; Guatemala said that they will follow up and also relocate their embassy, while the Czech Republic, Honduras, Paraguay, and Romania said that they were also considering embassy relocation. The European Union's foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini said that all governments of EU member states were united on the issue of Jerusalem, and also reaffirmed their commitment to a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.Palestinian officials said that the announcement disqualifies the U.S. from peace talks, while Hamas called for a new intifada following Trump's declaration. Following the announcement, there were demonstrations throughout the West Bank and Gaza Strip, as well as various countries around the world. By December 25, 2017, Salafi groups had fired almost 30 rockets towards Israel from the Gaza Strip, with almost half landing inside Gaza. Two caused minor damage to property near Ashkelon and Sderot, and Hamas rounded up the Salafists thought responsible for the attacks.On February 23, 2018, the U.S. State Department announced that the new embassy would open in May that year. The embassy was officially opened in Jerusalem on May 14, 2018, coinciding with the 70th anniversary of the Israeli Declaration of Independence. Representatives from 32 countries were present at opening of the embassy, including EU members Austria, the Czech Republic, and Romania. Protests on the Gaza border were met with tear gas and sniper fire by the Israel Defence Forces, resulting in the deaths of at least 58 Palestinians, the highest single-day death toll since the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict. The IDF and the Israeli government defended the use of force as necessary due to rocks and explosives thrown by protesters. The location of the relocated embassy is at the site of the former U.S. consulate general in the Arnona neighborhood of West Jerusalem.